# shocpp

A rudimentary implementation of OCPP, the Open Charge Point Protocol, Version 1.6

## Status

Testing: Beginning to use it in parallel with charger's built-in RFID counters.

## Goal

Build a customizable personal OCPP service for internal accounting.

## Scope

- Allow charging initiated by (RF)ID tag presentation (Active *Authorize/StartTransaction* calls from the charger).
- Allow charging initiated by the service (*RemoteStartTransaction* call to the charger with an (RF)ID tag to be assumed as presented).
- Keep track of power consumption on a per-account basis. (RF)ID tags are assigned to accounts.

## Limitations

- No authentication of charger, but can be added on a reverse proxy level.
- No encryption, but can be added on a reverse proxy level.
- No tracking of charging duration. Would need to save service-side state for that.
- Known obstacles to operation with more than one charger:
  - *shocpp-command* has no facility to route a command to a specific charger/shocpp process.

## Architecture

- *shocpp-backend* implements the entire logic and communicates via stdin/stdout, as known from inetd/xinetd/cgi-bin.
- *shocpp-listener* wraps *shocpp-backend* behind *websocketd*.
- *shocpp-command* passes payloads to *shocpp-backend*, to be sent to the charger.
- *shocpp-caller* is essentially similar to *shocpp-command*, but I use this to invoke hard-coded "canned calls" with random IDs from Siri shortcuts. 

## Configuration

- Listen address via the *WS_ADDRESS* environment (default: *0.0.0.0*, listen on all interfaces).
- Listen port via the *WS_PORT* environment (default: *8080*).
- Path to *tags.json* via *SHOCPP_TAGSFILE* environment (default: *conf/tags.json,* parallel to shocpp's *bin/* directory)
- Path to Accounting directory via *SHOCPP_ACCOUNTINGDIR* environment (default: *accounting/*, parallel to shocpp's *bin/* directory)

## tags.json

*tags.json* is a list of accounts, to which ID tags for the charger are assigned.

```json
[
  {
    "index": 1,
    "account": "company-x",
    "ids": [
      "1111",
      "2222"
    ]
  },
  {
    "index": 2,
    "account": "family-y",
    "ids": [
      "3333",
      "4444"
    ]
  },
  {
    "index": 3,
    "account": "company-z",
    "ids": [
      "5555",
      "6666",
      "7777",
      "8888",
      "9999"
    ]
  }
]
```

## Requirements

- Scripts are written in **Bash**, tested in Version > 5.1 only.
- **websocketd** - for the networking side.
- **jq** - for all JSON operations.
- **openssl** - the random part for accounting records stored in the filesystem is generated by *openssl rand*.

## Transaction ID model

*shocpp* keeps no state, but offloads state into the Transaction ID:

- *Rumor has it* that transaction IDs are signed Int32, so max transaction ID is *2.147.483.647*.
- The account ID from *tags.json* for a given (RF)ID tag is multiplied x 10000000. The Wh meter reading at start is converted to kWh and added to it. This number is the Transaction ID.
- On end of transaction, the transaction ID transmitted by the charger is disassembled back into account ID and meter reading at start, based on which the consumption is calculated.
- By this calculation, 
  - shocpp can serve up to 214 accounts, and infinite™ (RF)ID tags, and
  - at a meter reading of 10 GWh, the world comes to an end.

## Accounting

Accounting records are written to *accountingdir/year/month/unixtime-random.json*:

```text
$ tree accounting/
accounting/
└── 2023
    └── 09
        ├── 1693673985-cb298fc7f419.json
        ├── 1693688702-6e9c73294697.json
        └── 1693727530-0326fd891def.json

2 directories, 3 files
$ jq . accounting/2023/09/1693727530-0326fd891def.json
{
  "localtime": "2023-09-03 09:52:10",
  "unixtime": "1693727530",
  "account": "family-y",
  "begin_kwh": "9042",
  "end_kwh": "9075",
  "consumed_kwh": "33"
}
```

## *shocpp-command* examples

Synopsis:

```shell
shocpp-command <Call> <JSON Payload (the "inner" JSON) for call>
```

Examples:

```shell
bin/shocpp-command RemoteStartTransaction '{"idTag":"00000000"}'
bin/shocpp-command TriggerMessage '{"requestedMessage": "StatusNotification"}'
bin/shocpp-command Reset '{"type":"Soft"}'`
bin/shocpp-command Reset '{"type":"Hard"}'`
```

## HOWTO sniff OCPP traffic

Sourced from: https://osqa-ask.wireshark.org/questions/60725/how-to-dump-websockets-live-with-tshark/

```shell
tshark -p -i any -s0 -f 'port 8080' -Y websocket.payload -E occurrence=l -T fields -e ip.src -e ip.dst -e text
```

## Future TODOs

- Implement more functionality:
  - Power level and phase switching, solar integration.
- Command routing in *shocpp-command*:
  - Add identification of charger (serial number) to *shocpp-command* invocation, signal all processes, have the command sent by the process that is in contact with the given charger. 
  - Note that the serial is never actively transmitted after *BootNotification* and will have to be enumerated or kept as state.

## OCPP observations on go-eCharger Gemini

- OCPP compliance
  - *TriggerMessage* call for *MeterValues* supported since FW 055.7 Beta.
- Locally known RFID tags
  - 055.5: Sends locally known RFID tags to OCPP for authorization. Once authorized, consumption is reported to OCPP (*StartTransaction/StopTransaction*) and also added to the local RFID slot. The consumption after *RemoteStartTransaction* for the same RFID tag's ID is also added to the RFID slot.
  - 055.7 BETA: Accepts locally known RFID tags without any OCPP interaction, but adds consumption to the next free (unassigned) RFID configuration slot. Seems erratic. Github Issue: https://github.com/goecharger/go-eCharger-API-v2/issues/176
- Reconnect and reboot behaviour
  - If the charger reconnects after loss of the websocket connection, it checks back in with a *BootNotification*.
  - If the charger ends a transaction while the websocket connection is not available, it submits *StopTransaction* after reconnecting.
  - If the charger ends a transaction and reboots while the websocket connection is not available, and the websocket only becomes available after complete reboot, it submits *StopTransaction* after reconnecting.
  - More test cases? Seems solid so far.

## Further reading

- The OCPP specification: https://www.openchargealliance.org/downloads/

## LICENSE

ISC License

**Copyright 2023, the shocpp developers**

Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
